---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

<img align="left" src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1920151?v=4" alt="A curly, brown-haired, round-faced girl wearing a black shirt and silver necklace." style="border-radius: 50%; width: 200px; height: 200px; margin: 20px; box-shadow: 0px 0px 10px lightgray;">

**Hi, my name's Alexis Purslane!** I've been in love with software development
since I was seven.

This is a blog for me to write about software development topics that interest
me. That'll usually take the form of either rants about some concept or idea
I find interesting/annoying, or sporadic updates on my various projects. This
blog mostly exists so my girlfriend and one programmer friend don't have to
hear my opinions day in, day out, anymore! üòù

<br>

### Who am I?

I'm a bit of a language and software development polyglot, since I can quickly
pick up idiomatic *anything*, will use whatever language is the best tool for
a given job, and tend to jump from projects in wildly different fields of
software just to expand my horizons and stretch my mind.  I've used Rust, C,
Python, Kotlin, JavaScript, and TypeScript enough to feel fairly comfortable
with each (perhaps with a little refresher for TypeScript here and there), and
I've also used Ruby, Lua, OCaml, and a few others enough to pick them back up
with a little warm up. Likewise, I've done plenty of web development, some iOS
and Android app development, some language development, some game development,
etcetera.

I've decided to specialize primarily in the interrellated areas of systems
programming, graphics programming, large scale software architecture, and
highly parallel programming lately, after finding out that in systems
programming you get to do cool pragmatic stuff where advanced knowledge about
computer hardware, operating systems, algorithms, math, and data structures all
becomes relevant and interestingly intertwined. I love writing code in
languages where every memory allocation and deallocation, every CPU cycle, and
the layout of everything in memory is understandable and deterministic, so
I can choose algorithms that will be predictible fast and make performance
tradeoffs myself, while at the same time I have access to powerful abstractions
and programming tools that I can use to efficiently and sanely write larger
scale software without a ton of manual piping and duplication, especially when
those powerful abstractions are *also* still deterministic and largely map
comprehensably to underlying computer operations.  For this reason, my home
language is Rust, and I'm interested in learning C++.  I dislike using garbage
collected languages, and especially don't trust ~pure functional programming
languages like Haskell and OCaml or highly object-oriented languages like
Smalltalk, even if they can be optimized to be very fast, because of all the
nondeterministic magic that's going on under the hood.
